🌸 Iris Dataset Analysis – Project Overview
Objective

The goal of this project is to understand how to read, summarize, and visualize a dataset using Python.
We used the Iris dataset, a classic dataset in machine learning, to explore key data analysis and visualization techniques.

Steps Performed
1. Importing Libraries
We started by importing:
import pandas as pd
import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
These libraries are essential for data manipulation (pandas) and visualization (seaborn, matplotlib).


2. Loading the Dataset
The dataset (IRIS.csv) was loaded using:
df = pd.read_csv("IRIS.csv")
To understand the structure, we inspected:
df.shape      # Rows and columns count
df.columns    # List of feature names
df.head()     # First few rows
This confirmed that the dataset contains measurements of Iris flowers — sepal and petal length/width — along with their species labels.


3. Summarizing the Data
We generated summary statistics using:
df.describe()
This provided an overview of each feature’s mean, standard deviation, and range, helping to detect any irregularities or patterns.


4. Visualizations
We used matplotlib and seaborn to explore the dataset visually:

Scatter Plot:
sns.scatterplot(data=df, x="sepal_length", y="sepal_width", hue="species")
Showed relationships between sepal length and width across species.

Histogram:
sns.histplot(data=df, x="petal_length", kde=True)
Displayed the distribution of petal length and helped identify data spread.

Box Plot:
sns.boxplot(data=df, x="species", y="sepal_length")
Revealed the spread of sepal lengths and detected potential outliers.





Tools & Technologies
Python 3
pandas – for data loading and manipulation
seaborn – for high-level visualization
matplotlib – for custom plotting and fine control


Key Learnings
How to load and inspect data using pandas
How to summarize data using descriptive statistics
How to visualize relationships, distributions, and outliers using seaborn and matplotlib


Conclusion
This project provides a clear introduction to data exploration and visualization in Python.
By analyzing the Iris dataset, we practiced essential skills in data handling, descriptive statistics, and graphical analysis — the foundation for any data science or machine learning workflow.

